MILESTONE 2: RAG APPLICATION - SIMPLE EXPLANATION
===================================================

1. ONE-LINE PROJECT EXPLANATION
-------------------------------
This project is a document question-answering application. It reads PDF files
from Amazon S3, stores their meaning in Amazon OpenSearch, and uses Amazon
Bedrock to answer questions from those PDFs.

In simple words: upload PDFs, ask a question, and get an answer based on the
uploaded documents instead of a general internet answer.


2. WHAT DOES RAG MEAN?
----------------------
RAG means Retrieval-Augmented Generation.

It has two important steps:
1. Retrieval: find the most relevant parts of the uploaded documents.
2. Generation: give those parts to the AI model so it can write an answer.

This is better than asking an AI model without documents because the answer is
grounded in our own PDF content. The application also returns the source PDF,
chunk number, similarity score, and a short excerpt.


3. PIPELINE / ARCHITECTURE
--------------------------

                        INGESTION PIPELINE

PDF files in Amazon S3
        |
        v
PyMuPDF extracts readable text from each PDF
        |
        v
LangChain splits long text into smaller chunks
        |
        v
Amazon Bedrock Titan creates an embedding for every chunk
        |
        v
Amazon OpenSearch Serverless stores text, metadata, and embeddings


                        QUESTION-ANSWERING PIPELINE

User asks a question in Streamlit
        |
        v
Streamlit sends POST /ask to FastAPI
        |
        v
Bedrock Titan converts the question into an embedding
        |
        v
OpenSearch finds the most similar PDF chunks
        |
        v
Amazon Bedrock Nova Lite reads the question plus retrieved chunks
        |
        v
FastAPI returns the answer and source details
        |
        v
Streamlit shows the answer and citations to the user


4. COMPONENT-BY-COMPONENT EXPLANATION
-------------------------------------

Amazon S3
---------
S3 is the document storage area. The PDF files are uploaded there first.
The application lists the PDFs under the configured S3 prefix and downloads
them when ingestion starts.

PyMuPDF
-------
PyMuPDF is the PDF reader. It extracts embedded text directly from each PDF.
We changed the project from Amazon Textract to PyMuPDF because the current
documents are text-based PDFs and PyMuPDF is simpler, faster, and has no OCR
service call.

Important limitation: PyMuPDF does not perform OCR. A scanned PDF that only
contains images will not have readable text. Such a document must be converted
to a searchable PDF or processed with an OCR tool such as Textract first.

LangChain Chunking
------------------
A complete PDF can be too large to send to the model at one time. Therefore,
LangChain splits the extracted text into smaller pieces called chunks.

Current configuration:
- Chunk size: 900 characters
- Chunk overlap: 150 characters

Overlap repeats a small amount of text between adjacent chunks. This prevents
important meaning from being lost when a sentence lies near a chunk boundary.

Amazon Bedrock Titan Text Embeddings V2
---------------------------------------
An embedding is a list of numbers representing the meaning of text. Similar
meanings are placed close together mathematically.

The project creates embeddings for:
- Every PDF chunk during ingestion
- Every user question during retrieval

This lets the system find relevant content even when the user does not use the
exact same words as the PDF.

Amazon OpenSearch Serverless
----------------------------
OpenSearch is the vector database. It stores:
- The original text chunk
- The embedding vector
- S3 bucket and object key
- Chunk index

When a question arrives, OpenSearch compares its embedding with stored
embeddings and returns the closest chunks. This is semantic search.

Amazon Bedrock Nova Lite
------------------------
Nova Lite is the answer-generation model. It receives only the retrieved text
chunks and the user question. The prompt instructs it to answer only from that
context and to say it does not know if the answer is not available.

FastAPI
-------
FastAPI is the backend API. Its main endpoint is:

POST /ask

Example request:
{
  "question": "What is the Transformer attention mechanism?",
  "top_k": 4
}

It returns an answer plus source information. A browser GET request to /ask is
expected to fail because /ask only accepts POST requests. A log such as
"POST /ask 200 OK" means the request worked successfully.

Streamlit
---------
Streamlit is the user interface. It gives the project a chat-like webpage where
users can ask questions and see answers with source PDF details.


5. WHAT WE IMPLEMENTED IN THIS MILESTONE
----------------------------------------

1. S3 PDF discovery
   The application finds PDFs in the configured S3 bucket and prefix.

2. Direct PDF text extraction
   PyMuPDF downloads and extracts text from each text-based PDF.

3. Text chunking
   Long PDF text is split into manageable, overlapping chunks.

4. Vector embedding generation
   Bedrock Titan creates 1024-dimension semantic embeddings.

5. Vector indexing
   Chunks, metadata, and embeddings are stored in OpenSearch Serverless.

6. Semantic retrieval
   The application retrieves the chunks most related to the question.

7. Grounded answer generation
   Bedrock Nova Lite creates an answer from retrieved content only.

8. Source citations
   The API and UI return the S3 source path, chunk number, score, and excerpt.

9. FastAPI backend and Streamlit frontend
   The project has both a proper API and a usable chat interface.

10. Tests and evaluation support
    Offline unit tests validate chunking, extraction, API behavior, RAG flow,
    and OpenSearch Serverless behavior. A retrieval evaluation script is also
    included and should be updated to match the currently uploaded PDFs.


6. HOW TO DEMONSTRATE THE PROJECT
---------------------------------

Step 1: Start the API in one terminal.

PYTHONPATH=src .venv/bin/uvicorn rag_app.api:app --reload --port 8000

Step 2: Start Streamlit in another terminal.

.venv/bin/streamlit run streamlit_app.py

Step 3: Open the Streamlit URL shown in the terminal and ask questions about
the uploaded PDFs.

Good demonstration questions for the current research PDFs:
- What is the Transformer attention mechanism?
- What problem does Retrieval-Augmented Generation solve?
- What is BERT used for?
- What are the main benefits of LangChain?
- How does AWS support cloud computing?

Step 4: Point out that the answer includes the source PDF name, chunk number,
and similarity score. This shows that the answer came from retrieved evidence.

Optional API checks:
- http://localhost:8000/health
- http://localhost:8000/docs


7. SHORT PRESENTATION SCRIPT
----------------------------

"This project is a Retrieval-Augmented Generation application built on AWS.
First, I upload PDF documents to Amazon S3. During ingestion, PyMuPDF extracts
text from the PDFs. LangChain splits that text into smaller chunks. Amazon
Bedrock Titan converts every chunk into an embedding, and OpenSearch Serverless
stores those embeddings for semantic search.

When a user asks a question in Streamlit, the question goes to a FastAPI
backend. The backend creates an embedding for the question, OpenSearch finds
the most relevant chunks, and Bedrock Nova Lite generates an answer using only
those chunks. The user receives both the answer and the supporting PDF sources.

This reduces hallucination because the model is instructed to answer only from
the retrieved document context."


8. TEN TRADE-OFF QUESTIONS WITH ANSWERS
----------------------------------------

Q1. Why did you use PyMuPDF instead of Amazon Textract?
Answer: The uploaded files are text-based PDFs. PyMuPDF is faster and simpler
for extracting embedded text, and it avoids Textract processing cost and job
polling. The trade-off is that PyMuPDF cannot read image-only scanned PDFs. For
scanned documents, Textract or another OCR tool would be a better choice.

Q2. Why split a PDF into chunks instead of embedding the whole PDF?
Answer: Whole PDFs can be too large and contain many unrelated topics. Chunks
make search more precise and keep the model context small. The trade-off is
that chunking can split a sentence or idea. We use overlap to reduce this risk.

Q3. Why use a chunk size of 900 characters with 150 characters of overlap?
Answer: This is a balanced starting point. It is large enough to preserve
context but small enough to retrieve precise passages. Larger chunks give more
context but can bring unrelated text. Smaller chunks are more precise but may
miss the full meaning. These values should be tuned with evaluation questions.

Q4. Why use embeddings and semantic search instead of normal keyword search?
Answer: Keyword search needs the same words used in the document. Embeddings
search by meaning, so a question can still find relevant text with different
wording. The trade-off is that embeddings cost money to create and may return
meaningfully similar but not exact keyword matches.

Q5. Why use OpenSearch Serverless instead of a normal database?
Answer: OpenSearch Serverless is built for vector similarity search and AWS
manages the infrastructure. It is convenient for this prototype. The trade-off
is less low-level control and some API limitations, such as no client-supplied
document IDs and no explicit index refresh in this setup.

Q6. Why retrieve only the top K chunks instead of all chunks?
Answer: Sending every chunk would be slow, expensive, and may confuse the
model. Top K gives the model the best evidence only. The trade-off is that a
very small K may miss useful context, while a very large K adds irrelevant
context. The default is K = 4.

Q7. Why use RAG instead of training or fine-tuning a model on the PDFs?
Answer: RAG is faster to update. When a document changes, we re-ingest it
instead of retraining a model. It also provides sources for each answer.
Fine-tuning can help with behavior or style, but it is more expensive and does
not automatically provide reliable citations from changing documents.

Q8. How does the project reduce hallucinations?
Answer: Before generating an answer, the system retrieves relevant chunks from
the PDFs. The prompt tells the model to use only that context and say it does
not know when evidence is missing. This reduces hallucinations, but it does not
guarantee perfection. Retrieval quality and prompt design still matter.

Q9. What is the cost versus quality trade-off in this design?
Answer: Larger chunks, more retrieved chunks, and stronger models can improve
answer quality but increase Bedrock cost and response time. Smaller chunks,
fewer results, and smaller models reduce cost but can reduce answer quality.
Titan embeddings and Nova Lite provide a practical balance for this milestone.

Q10. What would you improve for a production version?
Answer: I would add authentication, user access controls, monitoring, logging,
rate limiting, automatic document-change detection, better evaluation data,
OCR routing for scanned PDFs, and a cleanup strategy for re-ingested Serverless
documents. I would also monitor retrieval quality and tune chunk size and top K
using real user questions.


9. CURRENT LIMITATIONS TO STATE HONESTLY
-----------------------------------------

- The current PyMuPDF path supports text-based PDFs, not scanned image-only
  PDFs.
- Re-ingesting the same PDFs into OpenSearch Serverless can create duplicate
  records because the service generates document IDs.
- The supplied evaluation questions were written for earlier sample policy
  PDFs. They should be replaced with questions and expected source keys for the
  five PDFs currently in S3.
- RAG reduces hallucination but does not guarantee a correct answer. The user
  should review the returned sources for important decisions.


10. FINAL CONCLUSION
--------------------

The milestone demonstrates a complete AWS RAG workflow from document storage
to a working chat user interface. It successfully extracts PDF text, creates
embeddings, performs semantic retrieval, generates grounded answers, and shows
the document sources that support those answers.
